1.3. Modeling is Not Computable
We modeled the digits of π as uniformly distributed and independent. Given that model, Shannon's coding theorem places a hard limit on the best compression that could be achieved. However, it is possible to use a better model. The digits of π are not really random. The digits are only unknown until you compute them. An intelligent compressor might recognize the digits of π and encode it as a description meaning "the first million digits of pi", or as a program that reconstructs the data when run. With our previous model, the best we could do is (106 log2 10)/8 ≈ 415,241 bytes. Yet, there are very small programs that can output π, some as small as 52 bytes.

Solomonoff (1960, 1964), Kolmogorov (1965), and Chaitin (1966) independently proposed a universal a-priori probability distribution over strings based on their minimum description length. The algorithmic probability of a string x is defined as the fraction of random programs in some language L that output x, where each program M is weighted by 2-|M| and |M| is the length of M in bits. This probability is dominated by the shortest such program. We call this length the Kolmogorov complexity KL(x) of x.

Algorithmic probability and complexity of a string x depend on the choice of language L, but only by a constant that is independent of x. Suppose that M1 and M2 are encodings of x in languages L1 and L2 respectively. For example, if L1 is C++, then M1 would be a program in C++ that outputs x. If L2 is English, the M2 would be a description of x with just enough detail that it would allow you to write x exactly. Now it is possible for any pair of languages to write in one language a compiler or interpreter or rules for understanding the other language. For example, you could write a description of the C++ language in English so that you could (in theory) read any C++ program and predict its output by "running" it in your head. Conversely, you could (in theory) write a program in C++ that input an English language description and translated it into C++. The size of the language description or compiler does not depend on x in any way. Then for any description M1 in any language L1 of any x, it is possible to find a description M2 in any other language L2 of x by appending to M1 a fixed length description of L1 written in L2.